---
layout: post
title: KDD algebra 2005-2006 intro
---

Functionally this is a binary classification problem. We measure the success of this model by its ability to predict whether a student can answer an algebra question correctly on the first try. Using the current expanded dataset, an off-the-shelf random forests classifier can achieve an AUC/ROC score of about 0.6 (starting from a naive classifier score of 0.5). 

Because this is an human-interpretable dataset, it is meaningful to discuss what its feature variables represent. The current iteration of this model focuses on three of the four main conceptual components of the dataset: problem, knowledge component, and opportunity. The complexity/difficulty level of an algebra problem is reflected in part in the number of knowledge components it contains, the temporal component in the opportunity count associated with each knowledge component, and the subject matter in the problem name and problem hierarchy (portion of the curriculum). The number of knowledge components a problem contains in part determines the difficulty level of that problem, and the number of opportunities a student has had to solve that problem contributes to the skill level the student has reached for the related subject matter. 

Knowledge component as defined by [PSLC](https://pslcdatashop.web.cmu.edu/KDDCup/rules_data_format.jsp) is “a generalization of everyday terms like concept, principle, fact, or skill, and cognitive science terms like schema, production rule, misconception, or facet.” In an algebra transaction, knowledge components are represented by string values similar to "combine like terms" or "identify the slope of a line." The author of a problem and potentially additional researchers provide the knowledge components associated with a transaction (also called a problem-step). A data sample from a geometry problem set is available [here](https://pslcdatashop.web.cmu.edu/KDDCup/rules_data_format.jsp#table-1).

There are many clear ways to build on this model. The subject matter associations between knowledge components could be explored, the step feature (the fourth conceptual component of the data) could be included, or the causal relationship between student performance and remedial problem assignment could be assessed.


